docs/src/build-from-source.md, before:

# Installing from source code

> If you were able to [install Kani](install-guide.md) normally, you do not need to build Kani from source.
> You probably want to proceed to the [Kani tutorial](kani-tutorial.md).

## Dependencies

In general, the following dependencies are required to build Kani from source.

> **NOTE**: These dependencies may be installed by running the scripts shown
> below and don't need to be manually installed.

1. Cargo installed via [rustup](https://rustup.rs/)
2. [CBMC](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc) (latest release)
3. [Kissat](https://github.com/arminbiere/kissat) (Release 4.0.1)
3. [Z3](https://github.com/Z3Prover/z3)
4. [cvc5](https://github.com/cvc5/cvc5)

Kani has been tested in [Ubuntu](#install-dependencies-on-ubuntu) and [macOS](##install-dependencies-on-macos) platforms.

### Install dependencies on Ubuntu

Support is available for Ubuntu 20.04, 22.04, and 24.04.
The simplest way to install dependencies (especially if you're using a fresh VM)
is following our CI scripts:

```
# git clone git@github.com:model-checking/kani.git
git clone https://github.com/model-checking/kani.git
cd kani
git submodule update --init
 # For Ubuntu 20.04, use: `./scripts/setup/ubuntu-20.04/install_deps.sh`
./scripts/setup/ubuntu/install_deps.sh
# If you haven't already (or from https://rustup.rs/):
./scripts/setup/install_rustup.sh
source $HOME/.cargo/env
```

### Install dependencies on macOS

Support is available for macOS 11. You need to have [Homebrew](https://brew.sh/) installed already.

```
# git clone git@github.com:model-checking/kani.git
git clone https://github.com/model-checking/kani.git
cd kani
git submodule update --init
./scripts/setup/macos/install_deps.sh
# If you haven't already (or from https://rustup.rs/):
./scripts/setup/install_rustup.sh
source $HOME/.cargo/env
```

## Build and test Kani

Build the Kani package using:

```
cargo build-dev -- --release
```
to compile with optimizations turned on or using:
```
cargo build-dev
```
to compile in debug/development mode.

Then, optionally, run the regression tests:

```
./scripts/kani-regression.sh
```

This script has a lot of noisy output, but on a successful run you'll see at the end of the execution:

```
All Kani regression tests completed successfully.
```

## Adding Kani to your path

To use a locally-built Kani from anywhere, add the Kani scripts to your path:

```bash
export PATH=$(pwd)/scripts:$PATH
```

## Next steps

If you're learning Kani for the first time, you may be interested in our [tutorial](kani-tutorial.md).

Commit message:

Create AGENTS.md to guide AI coding assistants
Add comprehensive guidance document for AI assistants working with
the Kani codebase, covering project overview, repository structure,
build commands, testing conventions, and development best practices.

docs/src/build-from-source.md, after:

# Installing from source code

> If you were able to [install Kani](install-guide.md) normally, you do not need to build Kani from source.
> You probably want to proceed to the [Kani tutorial](kani-tutorial.md).

## Dependencies

In general, the following dependencies are required to build Kani from source.

> **NOTE**: These dependencies may be installed by running the scripts shown
> below and don't need to be manually installed.

1. Cargo installed via [rustup](https://rustup.rs/)
2. [CBMC](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc) (latest release)
3. [Kissat](https://github.com/arminbiere/kissat) (Release 4.0.1)
3. [Z3](https://github.com/Z3Prover/z3)
4. [cvc5](https://github.com/cvc5/cvc5)

Kani has been tested in [Ubuntu](#install-dependencies-on-ubuntu) and [macOS](##install-dependencies-on-macos) platforms.

### Install dependencies on Ubuntu

Support is available for Ubuntu 20.04, 22.04, and 24.04.
The simplest way to install dependencies (especially if you're using a fresh VM)
is following our CI scripts:

```
# git clone git@github.com:model-checking/kani.git
git clone https://github.com/model-checking/kani.git
cd kani
git submodule update --init
 # For Ubuntu 20.04, use: `./scripts/setup/ubuntu-20.04/install_deps.sh`
./scripts/setup/ubuntu/install_deps.sh
# If you haven't already (or from https://rustup.rs/):
./scripts/setup/install_rustup.sh
source $HOME/.cargo/env
```

### Install dependencies on macOS

Support is available for macOS 11. You need to have [Homebrew](https://brew.sh/) installed already.

```
# git clone git@github.com:model-checking/kani.git
git clone https://github.com/model-checking/kani.git
cd kani
git submodule update --init
./scripts/setup/macos/install_deps.sh
# If you haven't already (or from https://rustup.rs/):
./scripts/setup/install_rustup.sh
source $HOME/.cargo/env
```

## Build and test Kani

Build the Kani package using:

```
cargo build-dev -- --release
```
to compile with optimizations turned on or using:
```
cargo build-dev
```
to compile in debug/development mode.

Then, optionally, run the regression tests:

```
./scripts/kani-regression.sh
```

This script has a lot of noisy output, but on a successful run you'll see at the end of the execution:

```
All Kani regression tests completed successfully.
```

## LLBC back-end

Kani includes an experimental back-end that generates Low-Level Borrow Calculus (LLBC)
output, which is the format used by [Charon](https://github.com/AeneasVerif/charon) and
[Aeneas](https://github.com/AeneasVerif/aeneas). This back-end translates Rust code into
LLBC, enabling integration with verification tools built on the Aeneas framework.

To build Kani with the LLBC back-end enabled, use:

```
cargo build-dev -- --features cprover --features llbc
```

This builds Kani with both the default CBMC/CPROVER back-end and the LLBC back-end.
To run the LLBC-specific regression tests:

```
./scripts/kani-llbc-regression.sh
```

> **NOTE**: The LLBC back-end is experimental and under active development.

## Adding Kani to your path

To use a locally-built Kani from anywhere, add the Kani scripts to your path:

```bash
export PATH=$(pwd)/scripts:$PATH
```

## Next steps

If you're learning Kani for the first time, you may be interested in our [tutorial](kani-tutorial.md).
