docs/src/install-github-ci.md, before:

# GitHub Action

Kani offers a GitHub Action for running Kani in CI.
As of now, only Ubuntu 20.04 with `x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu` is supported for Kani in CI.

## Using Kani in your GitHub workflow
Our GitHub Action is available in the [GitHub Marketplace](https://github.com/marketplace/actions/kani-rust-verifier).

The following workflow snippet will checkout your repository and run `cargo kani` on it whenever a push or pull request occurs.
Replace `<MAJOR>.<MINOR>` with the version of Kani you want to run with.

```yaml
name: Kani CI
on:
  pull_request:
  push:
jobs:
  run-kani:
    runs-on: ubuntu-20.04
    steps:
      - name: 'Checkout your code.'
        uses: actions/checkout@v3

      - name: 'Run Kani on your code.'
        uses: model-checking/kani-github-action@v<MAJOR>.<MINOR>
```

This will run `cargo kani` on the code you checked out.

### Options

The action takes the following optional parameters:

- `command`: The command to run. 
  Defaults to `cargo kani`.
  Most often, you will not need to change this.
- `working-directory`: The directory to execute the command in.
  Defaults to `.`.
  Useful if your repository has multiple crates, and you only want to run on one of them.
- `args`: The arguments to pass to the given `${command}`.
  See `cargo kani --help` for a full list of options.
  Useful options include:
  - `--output-format=terse` to generate terse output.
  - `--tests` to run on proofs inside the `test` module (needed for running Bolero).
  - `--workspace` to run on all crates within your repository.

## FAQ
- **Kani takes too long for my CI**: Try running Kani on a
  [schedule](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/events-that-trigger-workflows#schedule)
  with desired frequency.
- **Kani Silently Crashes with no logs**: Few possible reasons:
  - Kani ran out of RAM. GitHub offers up to 7GB of RAM, but Kani may
    use more. Run locally to confirm.
  - GitHub terminates jobs longer than 6 hours.
  - Otherwise, consider filing an issue [here](https://github.com/model-checking/kani/issues).

Commit message:

Emit SARIF output for Code Scanning (#4547)
Adds a new --sarif PATH option to write a SARIF v2.1.0 report for
verification results.

- Failed properties are reported as error; undetermined/unknown
properties as warning
- CBMC timeout/OOM is reported as error
- Artifact paths are made repo-relative when possible
- Docs and tests included

Example:
  cargo kani --sarif kani.sarif

GitHub Actions upload:
  - uses: github/codeql-action/upload-sarif@v3
    with:
      sarif_file: kani.sarif

Co-authored-by: KAMIYO <kamiyo-ai@users.noreply.github.com>

docs/src/install-github-ci.md, after:

# GitHub Action

Kani offers a GitHub Action for running Kani in CI.
As of now, only Ubuntu 20.04 with `x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu` is supported for Kani in CI.

## Using Kani in your GitHub workflow
Our GitHub Action is available in the [GitHub Marketplace](https://github.com/marketplace/actions/kani-rust-verifier).

The following workflow snippet will checkout your repository and run `cargo kani` on it whenever a push or pull request occurs.
Replace `<MAJOR>.<MINOR>` with the version of Kani you want to run with.

```yaml
name: Kani CI
on:
  pull_request:
  push:
jobs:
  run-kani:
    runs-on: ubuntu-20.04
    steps:
      - name: 'Checkout your code.'
        uses: actions/checkout@v3

      - name: 'Run Kani on your code.'
        uses: model-checking/kani-github-action@v<MAJOR>.<MINOR>
```

This will run `cargo kani` on the code you checked out.

### Options

The action takes the following optional parameters:

- `command`: The command to run. 
  Defaults to `cargo kani`.
  Most often, you will not need to change this.
- `working-directory`: The directory to execute the command in.
  Defaults to `.`.
  Useful if your repository has multiple crates, and you only want to run on one of them.
- `args`: The arguments to pass to the given `${command}`.
  See `cargo kani --help` for a full list of options.
  Useful options include:
  - `--output-format=terse` to generate terse output.
  - `--sarif <path>` to write a SARIF report that can be uploaded to GitHub Code Scanning.
  - `--tests` to run on proofs inside the `test` module (needed for running Bolero).
  - `--workspace` to run on all crates within your repository.

### Uploading SARIF to GitHub Code Scanning

If you run Kani with `--sarif`, you can upload the report so results show up as Code Scanning alerts.

```yaml
      - name: 'Run Kani on your code.'
        uses: model-checking/kani-github-action@v<MAJOR>.<MINOR>
        with:
          args: --sarif kani.sarif

      - name: 'Upload SARIF'
        uses: github/codeql-action/upload-sarif@v3
        with:
          sarif_file: kani.sarif
```

Your workflow must grant `security-events: write` permissions to upload SARIF results.

## FAQ
- **Kani takes too long for my CI**: Try running Kani on a
  [schedule](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/events-that-trigger-workflows#schedule)
  with desired frequency.
- **Kani Silently Crashes with no logs**: Few possible reasons:
  - Kani ran out of RAM. GitHub offers up to 7GB of RAM, but Kani may
    use more. Run locally to confirm.
  - GitHub terminates jobs longer than 6 hours.
  - Otherwise, consider filing an issue [here](https://github.com/model-checking/kani/issues).
