# Testing

Testing in Kani is carried out in multiple ways. There are at least
two very good reasons to do it:
 1. **Software regression**: A regression is a type of bug
    that appears after a change is introduced where a feature that
    was previously working has unexpectedly stopped working.

    Regression testing allows one to prevent a software regression
    from happening by running a comprehensive set of working tests
    before any change is committed to the project.
 2. **Software metrics**: A metric is a measure of software
    characteristics which are quantitative and countable. Metrics are
    particularly valuable for project management purposes.

We recommend reading our section on [Regression Testing](#regression-testing)
if you are interested in Kani development. At present, we obtain metrics based
on the [book runner](./bookrunner.md).

# Regression testing

Kani relies on a quite extensive range of tests to perform regression testing.
Regression testing can be executed by running the command:

```
./scripts/kani-regression.sh
```

The `kani-regression.sh` script executes different testing commands, which we classify into:
 * [Kani testing suites](#kani-testing-suites)
 * [Rust unit tests](#rust-unit-tests)
 * [Script-based tests](#script-based-tests)

See below for a description of each one.

Note that regression testing is run whenever a Pull Request is opened, updated or merged
into the main branch. Therefore, it is a good idea to run regression testing locally before
submitting a Pull Request for Kani.

## Kani testing suites

The Kani testing suites are the main testing resource for Kani. In most cases, the
tests contained in the Kani testing suites are single Rust files that are run
using the following command:

```
kani file.rs <options>
```

Command-line options `<options>` can be passed to the test by adding a special
comment to the file.
Read more about it in the [Testingoptions](#testing-options) section.

In particular, the Kani testing suites are composed of:
 * `kani`: The main testing suite for Kani. The test is a single Rust file that is
          run through Kani. In general, the test passes if verification with Kani
          is successful, otherwise it fails.
 * `firecracker`: Works like `kani` but contains tests inspired by
   [Firecracker](https://github.com/firecracker-microvm/firecracker) code.
 * `prusti`: Works like `kani` but contains tests from the
   [Prusti](https://github.com/viperproject/prusti-dev) tool.
 * `smack`: Works like `kani` but contains tests from the
   [SMACK](https://github.com/smackers/smack) tool.
 * `kani-fixme`: Similar to `kani`, but runs ignored tests from the `kani` testing
                suite (i.e., tests with `fixme` or `ignore` in their name).
                Allows us to detect when a previously not supported test becomes
                supported. More details in ["Fixme" tests](#"fixme"-tests).
 * `expected`: Similar to `kani` but with an additional check which ensures that
               lines appearing in `*.expected` files appear in the output
               generated by `kani`.
 * `cargo-kani`: This suite is designed to test the `cargo-kani` command. As such,
                this suite works with packages instead of single Rust files.
                Flags can be specified in the `Cargo.toml` configuration file.
                Similar to the `expected` suite, we look for `*.expected` files
                for each function under test.

We have extended
[`compiletest`](https://rustc-dev-guide.rust-lang.org/tests/intro.html) (the
Rust compiler testing framework) to work with these suites. That way, we take
advantage of all `compiletest` features (e.g., parallel execution).

### Testing stages

The process of running single-file tests is split into three stages:
 * `check`: This stage uses the Rust front-end to detect if the example is valid
   Rust code.
 * `codegen`: This stage uses the Kani back-end to determine if we can generate
   GotoC code.
 * `verify`: This stage uses CBMC to obtain a verification result.

If a test fails, the error message will include the stage where it failed:

```
error: test failed: expected check success, got failure
```

When working on a test that is expected to fail, there are two options to
indicate an expected failure. The first one is to add a comment

```rust
// kani-<stage>-fail
```
at the top of the test file, where `<stage>` is the stage where the test is
expected to fail.

The other option is to use the predicate `kani::expect_fail(cond, message)`
included in the Kani library. The `cond` in `kani::expect_fail` is a condition
that you expect not to hold during verification. The testing framework expects
one `EXPECTED FAIL` message in the verification output for each use of the
predicate.

> **Warning:** Note that `kani::expect_fail` is only useful to indicate
> failure in the `verify` stage, errors in other stages will be considered
> testing failures.

### Testing options

Many tests will require passing command-line options to Kani. These options can
be specified in single Rust files by adding a comment at the top of the file:
```
// kani-flags: <options>
```

For example, to increase the unwinding value to 4 in a test, we can write:

```
// kani-flags: --cbmc-args --unwind 4
```

Alternatively, CBMC flags can also be passed using `cbmc-flags`:

```
// cbmc-flags: --unwind 4
```

> **Warning:** `cbmc-flags` is likely to be deprecated in the near future. We
> recommend using `kani-flags` with `--cbmc-args` for now.

For `cargo-kani` tests, the preferred way to pass command-line options is adding
them to `Cargo.toml` below the `[kani.flags]` marker.

### "Fixme" tests

Any test containing `fixme` or `ignore` in its name is considered a test not
supported for some reason. Generally, these tests are not run because they will
either return a wrong result (since they are not supported) or take a long time
to finish.

However, "fixme" tests included in the `kani` folder are run via the `kani-fixme`
testing suite. `kani-fixme` works on test files from `kani` but:
 1. Only runs tests whose name contains `fixme` or `ignore` (ignoring the rest).
 2. The expected outcome is failure. In other words, a test is successful if it
    fails.

We welcome contributions with "fixme" tests which demonstrate a bug or
unsupported feature in Kani. Ideally, the test should include some comments
regarding:
 * The expected result of the test.
 * The actual result of the test (e.g., interesting parts of the output).
 * Links to related issues.

To include a new "fixme" test in `kani` you only need to ensure its name contains
`fixme` or `ignore`. If your changes to Kani cause a "fixme" test to become
supported, you only need to rename it so the name does not contain `fixme` nor
`ignore`.

## Rust unit tests

These tests follow the
[Rust unit testing](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rust-by-example/testing/unit_testing.html)
style.

At present, Kani only uses unit tests in the
[cbmc crate](https://github.com/model-checking/kani/tree/main/compiler/cbmc)
to test the
[identity symbol table transformer](https://github.com/model-checking/kani/blob/main/compiler/cbmc/src/goto_program/symtab_transformer/identity_transformer.rs).

## Script-based tests

These are tests which are run using scripts. Scripting gives us the ability to
perform ad-hoc checks that cannot be done otherwise. They are currently used
for:
 * Standard library codegen
 * Firecracker virtio codegen
 * Diamond dependency
 * Type mismatch

In fact, most of them are equivalent to running `cargo kani` and performing
checks on the output. The downside to scripting is that these tests will always
be run, even if there have not been any changes since the last time the
regression was run.

> **Warning:** `cargo kani` is under heavy development at the moment. Because of
> that, this section may become outdated soon.
