docs/src/regression-testing.md, before:

# Regression testing

Kani relies on a quite extensive range of tests to perform regression testing.
Regression testing can be executed by running the command:

```bash
./scripts/kani-regression.sh
```

The `kani-regression.sh` script executes different testing commands, which we classify into:
 * [Kani testing suites](#kani-testing-suites)
 * [Rust unit tests](#rust-unit-tests)
 * [Python unit tests](#python-unit-tests)
 * [Script-based tests](#script-based-tests)

See below for a description of each one.

Note that regression testing is run whenever a Pull Request is opened, updated or merged
into the main branch. Therefore, it's a good idea to run regression testing locally before
submitting a Pull Request for Kani.

## Kani testing suites

The Kani testing suites are the main testing resource for Kani. In most cases, the
tests contained in the Kani testing suites are single Rust files that are run
using the following command:

```bash
kani file.rs <options>
```

Command-line options can be passed to the test by adding a special
comment to the file. See [testing options](#testing-options) for more details.

In particular, the Kani testing suites are composed of:
 * `kani`: The main testing suite for Kani. The test is a single Rust file that's
          run through Kani. In general, the test passes if verification with Kani
          is successful, otherwise it fails.
 * `firecracker`: Works like `kani` but contains tests inspired by
   [Firecracker](https://github.com/firecracker-microvm/firecracker) code.
 * `prusti`: Works like `kani` but contains tests from the
   [Prusti](https://github.com/viperproject/prusti-dev) tool.
 * `smack`: Works like `kani` but contains tests from the
   [SMACK](https://github.com/smackers/smack) tool.
 * `kani-fixme`: Similar to `kani`, but runs ignored tests from the `kani` testing
                suite (i.e., tests with `fixme` or `ignore` in their name).
                Allows us to detect when a previously not supported test becomes
                supported. More details in ["Fixme" tests](#fixme-tests).
 * `expected`: Similar to `kani` but with an additional check which ensures that
               lines appearing in `*.expected` files appear in the output
               generated by `kani`.
 * `ui`: Works like `expected`, but focuses on the user interface (e.g.,
         warnings) instead of the verification output.
 * `cargo-kani`: This suite is designed to test the `cargo-kani` command. As such,
                this suite works with packages instead of single Rust files.
                Arguments can be specified in the `Cargo.toml` configuration file.
                Similar to the `expected` suite, we look for `*.expected` files
                for each harness in the package.
 * `cargo-ui`: Similar to `cargo-kani`, but focuses on the user interface like the `ui` test suite.
 * `script-based-pre`: This suite is useful to execute script-based tests, and
                        also allows checking expected output and exit codes after
                        running them. The suite uses the `exec` mode, described in
                        more detail [here](#the-exec-mode).


We've extended
[`compiletest`](https://rustc-dev-guide.rust-lang.org/tests/intro.html) (the
Rust compiler testing framework) to work with these suites. That way, we take
advantage of all `compiletest` features (e.g., parallel execution).

### Testing stages

The process of running single-file tests is split into three stages:
 * `check`: This stage uses the Rust front-end to detect if the example is valid
   Rust code.
 * `codegen`: This stage uses the Kani back-end to determine if we can generate
   GotoC code.
 * `verify`: This stage uses CBMC to obtain a verification result.

If a test fails, the error message will include the stage where it failed:

```
error: test failed: expected check success, got failure
```

When working on a test that's expected to fail, there are two options to
indicate an expected failure. The first one is to add a comment

```rust
// kani-<stage>-fail
```
at the top of the test file, where `<stage>` is the stage where the test is
expected to fail.

The other option is to use the predicate `kani::expect_fail(cond, message)`
included in the Kani library. The `cond` in `kani::expect_fail` is a condition
that you expect not to hold during verification. The testing framework expects
one `EXPECTED FAIL` message in the verification output for each use of the
predicate.

> **NOTE**: `kani::expect_fail` is only useful to indicate failure in the
> `verify` stage, errors in other stages will be considered testing failures.

### Testing options

Many tests will require passing command-line options to Kani. These options can
be specified in single Rust files by adding a comment at the top of the file:

```rust
// kani-flags: <options>
```

For example, to use an unwinding value of 4 in a test, we can write:

```rust
// kani-flags: --default-unwind 4
```

For `cargo-kani` tests, the preferred way to pass command-line options is adding
them to `Cargo.toml`. See [`Usage on a package`](./usage.md#usage-on-a-package) for more details.

### "Fixme" tests

Any test containing `fixme` or `ignore` in its name is considered a test not
supported for some reason (i.e., they return an unexpected verification result).

However, "fixme" tests included in the `kani` folder are run via the `kani-fixme`
testing suite. `kani-fixme` works on test files from `kani` but:
 1. Only runs tests whose name contains `fixme` or `ignore` (ignoring the rest).
 2. The expected outcome is failure. In other words, a test is successful if it
    fails.

We welcome contributions with "fixme" tests which demonstrate a bug or
unsupported feature in Kani. Ideally, the test should include some comments
regarding:
 * The expected result of the test.
 * The actual result of the test (e.g., interesting parts of the output).
 * Links to related issues.

To include a new "fixme" test in `kani` you only need to ensure its name contains
`fixme` or `ignore`. If your changes to Kani cause a "fixme" test to become
supported, you only need to rename it so the name does not contain `fixme` nor
`ignore`.

## Rust unit tests

These tests follow the
[Rust unit testing](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rust-by-example/testing/unit_testing.html)
style.

At present, Kani runs unit tests from the following packages:
 * `cprover_bindings`
 * `kani-compiler`
 * `cargo-kani`

## Python unit tests

We use the Python [unit testing framework](https://docs.python.org/3/library/unittest.html) to
test the CBMC JSON parser.

## Script-based tests

These are tests which are run using scripts. Scripting gives us the ability to
perform ad-hoc checks that cannot be done otherwise. They are currently used
for:
 * Standard library codegen
 * Firecracker virtio codegen
 * Diamond dependency

In fact, most of them are equivalent to running `cargo kani` and performing
checks on the output. The downside to scripting is that these tests will always
be run, even if there have not been any changes since the last time the
regression was run.

> **NOTE**: With the addition of the `exec` mode for `compiletest` (described
> below), we'll be migrating these script-based tests to other suites using the
> `exec` mode. The `exec` mode allows us to take advantage of `compiletest`
> features while executing script-based tests (e.g., parallel execution).

### The `exec` mode

The `exec` mode in `compiletest` allows us to execute script-based tests, in
addition to checking expected output and exit codes after running them.

In particular, tests are expected to be placed directly under the test directory
(e.g., `script-based-pre`) in a directory with a `config.yml` file, which
should contain:
 * `script`: The path to the script to be executed.
 * `expected` (optional): The path to the `.expected` file to
use for output comparison.
 * `exit_code` (optional): The exit code to be returned by executing
the script (a zero exit code is expected if not specified).

For example, let's say want to test the script `exit-one.sh`:

```bash
echo "Exiting with code 1!"
exit 1
```

In this case, we'll create a folder that contains the `config.yml` file:

```yml
script: exit-one.sh
expected: exit-one.expected
exit_code: 1
```

where `exit-one.expected` is simply a text file such as:

```text
Exiting with code 1!
```

If `expected` isn't specified, the output won't be checked. If `exit_code` isn't
specified, the `exec` mode will check the exit code was zero.

Note that all paths specified in the `config.yml` file are local to the test
directory, which is the working directory assumed when executing the test. This
is meant to avoid problems when executing the test manually.

Commit message:

Kani Book Documentation Improvements (#4296)
Best reviewed commit by commit.

Resolves https://github.com/model-checking/kani/issues/4026
Resolves https://github.com/model-checking/kani/issues/3999
Resolves https://github.com/model-checking/kani/issues/3568
Resolves https://github.com/model-checking/kani/issues/2539
Resolves https://github.com/model-checking/kani/issues/3041

By submitting this pull request, I confirm that my contribution is made
under the terms of the Apache 2.0 and MIT licenses.

---------

Co-authored-by: Michael Tautschnig <mt@debian.org>

docs/src/regression-testing.md, after:

# Regression testing

Kani relies on a quite extensive range of tests to perform regression testing.
Regression testing can be executed by running the command:

```bash
./scripts/kani-regression.sh
```

The `kani-regression.sh` script executes different testing commands, which we classify into:
 * [Kani testing suites](#kani-testing-suites)
 * [Rust unit tests](#rust-unit-tests)
 * [Python unit tests](#python-unit-tests)
 * [Script-based tests](#script-based-tests)

See below for a description of each one.

Note that regression testing is run whenever a Pull Request is opened, updated or merged
into the main branch. Therefore, it's a good idea to run regression testing locally before
submitting a Pull Request for Kani.

## Kani testing suites

The Kani testing suites are the main testing resource for Kani. In most cases, the
tests contained in the Kani testing suites are single Rust files that are run
using the following command:

```bash
kani file.rs <options>
```

Command-line options can be passed to the test by adding a special
comment to the file. See [testing options](#testing-options) for more details.

In particular, the Kani testing suites are composed of:
 * `kani`: The main testing suite for Kani. The test is a single Rust file that's
          run through Kani. In general, the test passes if verification with Kani
          is successful, otherwise it fails.
 * `firecracker`: Works like `kani` but contains tests inspired by
   [Firecracker](https://github.com/firecracker-microvm/firecracker) code.
 * `prusti`: Works like `kani` but contains tests from the
   [Prusti](https://github.com/viperproject/prusti-dev) tool.
 * `smack`: Works like `kani` but contains tests from the
   [SMACK](https://github.com/smackers/smack) tool.
 * `kani-fixme`: Similar to `kani`, but runs ignored tests from the `kani` testing
                suite (i.e., tests with `fixme` or `ignore` in their name).
                Allows us to detect when a previously not supported test becomes
                supported. More details in ["Fixme" tests](#fixme-tests).
 * `expected`: Similar to `kani` but with an additional check which ensures that
               lines appearing in `*.expected` files appear in the output
               generated by `kani`.
 * `ui`: Works like `expected`, but focuses on the user interface (e.g.,
         warnings) instead of the verification output.
 * `cargo-kani`: This suite is designed to test the `cargo-kani` command. As such,
                this suite works with packages instead of single Rust files.
                Arguments can be specified in the `Cargo.toml` configuration file.
                Similar to the `expected` suite, we look for `*.expected` files
                for each harness in the package.
 * `cargo-ui`: Similar to `cargo-kani`, but focuses on the user interface like the `ui` test suite.
 * `script-based-pre`: This suite is useful to execute script-based tests, and
                        also allows checking expected output and exit codes after
                        running them. The suite uses the `exec` mode, described in
                        more detail [here](#the-exec-mode).


We've extended
[`compiletest`](https://rustc-dev-guide.rust-lang.org/tests/intro.html) (the
Rust compiler testing framework) to work with these suites. That way, we take
advantage of all `compiletest` features (e.g., parallel execution).

A good rule of thumb is to put a test in the `kani` or `cargo-kani` folders if all we care about is codegen and verification succeeding. This is usually the case if we're fixing a code pattern that previously crashed, so a successful verification result is a sufficient test. Otherwise, if the output refers to UI, e.g., a compiler error with a highlighted span, put it in the `ui` or `cargo-ui` suites. If the output is for a CBMC-based property that we expect Kani to check (e.g., ensuring that a particular assertion passes or fails), use the `expected` folder. 

### Testing stages

The process of running single-file tests is split into three stages:
 * `check`: This stage uses the Rust front-end to detect if the example is valid
   Rust code.
 * `codegen`: This stage uses the Kani back-end to determine if we can generate
   GotoC code.
 * `verify`: This stage uses CBMC to obtain a verification result.

If a test fails, the error message will include the stage where it failed:

```
error: test failed: expected check success, got failure
```

Some tests have the following, historical syntax:

```rust
// kani-<stage>-fail
```
at the top of the test file, where `<stage>` is the stage where the test is
expected to fail.

We retain support for this test format, but prefer `expected` tests, since they more precisely indicate which failure we expect, rather than a general verification or codegen failure.

### Testing options

Many tests will require passing command-line options to Kani. These options can
be specified in single Rust files by adding a comment at the top of the file:

```rust
// kani-flags: <options>
```

For example, to use an unwinding value of 4 in a test, we can write:

```rust
// kani-flags: --default-unwind 4
```

For `cargo-kani` tests, the preferred way to pass command-line options is adding
them to `Cargo.toml`. See [`Usage on a package`](./usage.md#usage-on-a-package) for more details.

### "Fixme" tests

Any test containing `fixme` or `ignore` in its name is considered a test not
supported for some reason (i.e., they return an unexpected verification result).

However, "fixme" tests included in the `kani` folder are run via the `kani-fixme`
testing suite. `kani-fixme` works on test files from `kani` but:
 1. Only runs tests whose name contains `fixme` or `ignore` (ignoring the rest).
 2. The expected outcome is failure. In other words, a test is successful if it
    fails.

We welcome contributions with "fixme" tests which demonstrate a bug or
unsupported feature in Kani. Ideally, the test should include some comments
regarding:
 * The expected result of the test.
 * The actual result of the test (e.g., interesting parts of the output).
 * Links to related issues.

To include a new "fixme" test in `kani` you only need to ensure its name contains
`fixme` or `ignore`. If your changes to Kani cause a "fixme" test to become
supported, you only need to rename it so the name does not contain `fixme` nor
`ignore`.

## Rust unit tests

These tests follow the
[Rust unit testing](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rust-by-example/testing/unit_testing.html)
style.

At present, Kani runs unit tests from the following packages:
 * `cprover_bindings`
 * `kani-compiler`
 * `cargo-kani`

## Python unit tests

We use the Python [unit testing framework](https://docs.python.org/3/library/unittest.html) to
test the CBMC JSON parser.

## Script-based tests

These are tests which are run using scripts. Scripting gives us the ability to
perform ad-hoc checks that cannot be done otherwise. They are currently used
for:
 * Standard library codegen
 * Firecracker virtio codegen
 * Diamond dependency

In fact, most of them are equivalent to running `cargo kani` and performing
checks on the output. The downside to scripting is that these tests will always
be run, even if there have not been any changes since the last time the
regression was run.

> **NOTE**: With the addition of the `exec` mode for `compiletest` (described
> below), we'll be migrating these script-based tests to other suites using the
> `exec` mode. The `exec` mode allows us to take advantage of `compiletest`
> features while executing script-based tests (e.g., parallel execution).

### The `exec` mode

The `exec` mode in `compiletest` allows us to execute script-based tests, in
addition to checking expected output and exit codes after running them.

In particular, tests are expected to be placed directly under the test directory
(e.g., `script-based-pre`) in a directory with a `config.yml` file, which
should contain:
 * `script`: The path to the script to be executed.
 * `expected` (optional): The path to the `.expected` file to
use for output comparison.
 * `exit_code` (optional): The exit code to be returned by executing
the script (a zero exit code is expected if not specified).

For example, let's say want to test the script `exit-one.sh`:

```bash
echo "Exiting with code 1!"
exit 1
```

In this case, we'll create a folder that contains the `config.yml` file:

```yml
script: exit-one.sh
expected: exit-one.expected
exit_code: 1
```

where `exit-one.expected` is simply a text file such as:

```text
Exiting with code 1!
```

If `expected` isn't specified, the output won't be checked. If `exit_code` isn't
specified, the `exec` mode will check the exit code was zero.

Note that all paths specified in the `config.yml` file are local to the test
directory, which is the working directory assumed when executing the test. This
is meant to avoid problems when executing the test manually.
