book/src/proptest/no-std.md, before:

# `no_std` Support

Proptest has partial support for being used in `no_std` contexts.

You will need a nightly compiler version. In your `Cargo.toml`, adjust the
Proptest dependency to look something like this:

```toml
[dev-dependencies.proptest]
version = "proptestVersion"

# Opt out of the `std` feature
default-features = false

# alloc: Use the `alloc` crate directly. Proptest has a hard requirement on
# memory allocation, so either this or `std` is needed.
# unstable: Enable use of nightly-only compiler features.
features = ["alloc", "unstable"]
```

Some APIs are not available in the `no_std` build. This includes functionality
which necessarily needs `std` such as failure persistence and forking, as well
as features depending on other crates which do not support `no_std` usage, such
as regex support.

To see an accurate representation of what APIs are available in a `no_std`
environment, refer to [the rustdocs for the `no_std`
build](https://altsysrq.github.io/rustdoc/proptest-nostd/latest/proptest/)
instead of the usual reference.

Commit message:

Document that no_std implies a hardcoded RNG seed.

book/src/proptest/no-std.md, after:

# `no_std` Support

Proptest has partial support for being used in `no_std` contexts.

You will need a nightly compiler version. In your `Cargo.toml`, adjust the
Proptest dependency to look something like this:

```toml
[dev-dependencies.proptest]
version = "proptestVersion"

# Opt out of the `std` feature
default-features = false

# alloc: Use the `alloc` crate directly. Proptest has a hard requirement on
# memory allocation, so either this or `std` is needed.
# unstable: Enable use of nightly-only compiler features.
features = ["alloc", "unstable"]
```

Some APIs are not available in the `no_std` build. This includes functionality
which necessarily needs `std` such as failure persistence and forking, as well
as features depending on other crates which do not support `no_std` usage, such
as regex support.

The `no_std` build does not have access to an entropy source. As a result,
every `TestRunner` (i.e., every `#[test]` when using the `proptest!` macro)
uses a single hard-coded seed. For complex inputs, it may be a good idea to
increase the number of test cases to compensate. The hard-coded seed is not
contractually guaranteed and may change between Proptest releases without
notice.

To see an accurate representation of what APIs are available in a `no_std`
environment, refer to [the rustdocs for the `no_std`
build](https://altsysrq.github.io/rustdoc/proptest-nostd/latest/proptest/)
instead of the usual reference.
