rfc/src/rfcs/0012-loop-contracts.md, before:

- **Feature Name:** Loop Contracts
- **Feature Request Issue:** [#3168](https://github.com/model-checking/kani/issues/3168)
- **RFC PR:** [#3167](https://github.com/model-checking/kani/pull/3167)
- **Status:** Under Review
- **Version:** 1
- **Proof-of-concept:** 

-------------------

## Summary

Loop contracts provide way to safely abstract loops of a program, typically
in order to accelerate the verification process, and remove the loop unwinding
bounds. The key idea is to over-approximate the possible set of program states,
while still being precise enough to be able to prove the desired property.

## User Impact

Loop contracts provide an interface for a verified, sound abstraction.
The goal for specifying loop contracts in the source code is two fold:

* Unbounded verification: Currently, proving correctness
  (i.e. assertions never fail) on programs with unbounded control flow (e.g. 
  loops with dynamic bounds) Kani requires unwinding loops for a large number of
  times, which is not always feasible. Loop contracts provide a way to abstract
  out loops, and hence remove the need for unwinding loops.
* Faster CI runs: In most cases, the provided contracts would also significantly
  improve Kani's verification time since all loops would be unrolled only to
  a single iteration.



Loop contracts are completely optional with no user impact if unused. This
RFC proposes the addition of new attributes, and functions, that shouldn't
interfere with existing functionalities.


## User Experience

A loop contract specifies the behavior of a loop as a boolean predicate
(loop invariants clauses) with certain frames conditions (loop modifies clauses)
that can be checked against the loop implementation, and used to abstract out
the loop in the verification process.

We illustrate the usage of loop contracts with an example.
Consider the following program:
```rs
fn simple_loop() {
    let mut x: u64 = kani::any_where(|i| *i >= 1);

    while x > 1{
        x = x - 1;
    };

    assert!(x == 1);
}
```
The loop in the `simple_loop` function keep subtracting 1 from `x` until `x` is 1.
However, Kani currently needs to unroll the loop for `u64::MAX` number of times
to verify the assertion at the end of the program. 

With loop contracts, the user can specify the behavior of the loop as follows:
```rs
fn simple_loop_with_loop_contracts() {
    let mut x: u64 = kani::any_where(|i| *i >= 1);

    #[kani::loop_invariant(x >= 1)]
    while x > 1{
        x = x - 1;
    };

    assert!(x == 1);
}
```
The loop invariant clause `#[kani::loop_invariant(x >= 1)]` specifies the loop
invariants that must hold at the beginning of each iteration of the loop right before
checking the loop guard.

In this case, Kani verifies that the loop invariant `x >= 1` is inductive, i.e.,
`x` is always greater than or equal to 1 at each iteration before checking `x > 1`.


Also, once Kani proved that the loop invariant is inductive, it can safely use the loop
invariants to abstract the loop out of the verification process.
The idea is, instead of exploring all possible branches of the loop, Kani only needs to
prove those branches reached from an arbitrary program state that satisfies the loop contracts,
after the execution of one iteration of the loop.

So, for loops without break statements, we can assume all post-states of the loop satisfying
`inv && !loop_guard` for proving post-loops properties.
The requirement of satisfying the negation of the loop guard comes from the fact that a path
exits loops without break statements must fail the loop guard.

For example, applying loop contracts in `simple_loop` function is equivalent to the following:
```rs
fn simple_loop_transformed() {
    let mut x: u64 = kani::any_where(|i| *i >= 1);

    x = kani::any(); // Arbitrary program state that
    kani::assume( !(x > 1) && x >= 1); // satisfies !`guard` && `inv` 

    assert!(x == 1);
}
```
The assumption above is actually equivalent to `x == 1`, hence the assertion at the end
of the program is proved.

### Write Sets and Havocking

For those memory locations that are not modified in the loop, loop invariants state
that they stay unchanged throughout the loop are inductive. In other words, Kani should
only havoc the memory locations that are modified in the loop. This is achieved by
specifying the `modifies` clause for the loop. For example, the following program:
```rs
fn simple_loop_two_vars() {
    let mut x: u64 = kani::any_where(|i| *i >= 1);
    let mut y: u64 = 1;

    #[kani::loop_invariant(x >= 1)]
    #[kani::loop_modifies(x)]
    while x > 1{
        x = x - 1;
    };

    assert!(x == 1);
    assert!(y == 1);
}
```
write to only `x` in the loop, hence the `modifies` clause contains only `x`.
Then when use the loop contracts to abstract the loop, Kani will only havoc the memory
location `x` and keep `y` unchanged. Note that if the `modifies` clause contains also
`y`, Kani will havoc both `x` and `y`, and hence violate the assertion `y == 1`.

Kani can employs CBMC's write set inference to infer the write set of the loop.
So users have to specify the `modifies` clauses by their self only when the inferred write
sets are not complete---there exists some target that could be written to in the loop but 
is not in the inferred write set.

### Proof of termination
    
Loop contracts also provide a way to prove the termination of the loop.
Without the proof of termination, Kani could report success of some assertions that
are actually unreachable due to non-terminating loops.
For example, consider the following program:

```rs
fn simple_loop_non_terminating() {
    let mut x: u64 = kani::any_where(|i| *i >= 1);

    #[kani::loop_invariant(x >= 1)]
    while true{
        x = x;
    };

    assert!(x >= 1);
}
```
After abstracting the loop, the loop will be transformed to no-op, and the assertion
`x >= 1` will be proved. However, the loop is actually an infinite loop, and the
assertion will never be reached.

For this reason, Kani will also require the user to provide a `decreases` clause that
specifies a decreasing expression to prove the termination of the loop. For example, in
```rs
fn simple_loop_terminating() {
    let mut x: u64 = kani::any_where(|i| *i >= 1);

    #[kani::loop_invariant(x >= 1)]
    #[kani::loop_decreases(x)]
    while x > 1{
        x = x - 1;
    };

    assert!(x >= 1);
}
```
, the `decreases` clause `#[kani::loop_decreases(x)]` specifies that the value of `x`
decreases at each iteration of the loop, and hence the loop will terminate.


## Detailed Design


Kani implements the functionality of loop contracts in three places.

1. Procedural macros `loop_invariant`, `loop_modifies`, and `loop_decreases`.
2. Code generation for builtin functions expanded from the above macros.
3. GOTO-level loop contracts using CBMC's contract language generated in
   `kani-compiler`.

### Procedural macros `loop_invariant`, `loop_modifies`, and `loop_decreases`.

We will implement the three proc-macros `loop_invariant`, `loop_modifies`, and `loop_decreases` to
embed the annotation logic as Rust code. Kani will then compile them into MIR-level code.


### Code Generation for Builtin Functions

Then in the MIR, we codegen the loop contracts as GOTO-level expressions and annotate them
into the corresponding loop latches---the jumps back to the loop head.

The artifact `goto-instrument` in CBMC will extract the loop contracts from the named-subs
of the loop latch, and then apply and prove the extracted loop contracts.


### GOTO-Level Havocing

The ordinary havocing in CBMC is not aware of the type constraints of Rust type.
Hence, we will use customized havocing functions for modifies targets. In detail,
Kani will generate code for the definition of corresponding `kani::any()` functions
for each modifies target. Then Kani will create a map from the modifies target to the
the name of its `kani::any()` function, and add the map to the loop latch too.

On the CBMC site, `goto-instrument` will extract the map and instrument the customized
havocing functions for the modifies targets.

## Rationale and alternatives



### Rust-Level Transformation vs CBMC 

Besides transforming the loops in GOTO level using `goto-instrument`,
we could also do the transformation in Rust level using procedural macros, or
in MIR level.

There are two reasons we prefer the GOTO-level transformation.
First, `goto-instrument` is a mature tool that can correctly instrument the frame
condition checking for the transformed loop, which will save us from reinventing
the error-prone wheel. Second, the loop contracts synthesis tool we developed and
are developing are all based on GOTO level. Hence, doing the transformation in
the GOTO level will make the integration of loop contracts with the synthesis tool
easier.

## Open questions

- How do we integrate loop contracts with the synthesis tool? When the user-provided
  loop contracts are not enough prove the harness, we expect the loop-contract synthesizer
  can fix the loop contracts.
- How do we translate back modify targets that inferred by CBMC to Rust level? 
- It is not clear how the CBMC loop modifies inference works for Rust code. We need to
  experiment more to decide what would be the best UX of using loop modifies.
- How do we handle havocing in unsafe code where it is fine to break the safety invariant
  of Rust? In that case, we may need havocing function that preserves validity invariant
  but not safety invariant.

## Future possibilities

- We can improve the UX by allowing users to choose if they want to apply loop contracts
  to certain annotated loops or not.
- We can employ CBMC's decreases inference to infer the decreases clauses to reduce the
  user burden of specifying the decreases clauses.

<!-- For Developers -->

---

Commit message:

Added clarification about question of opt-out from loop contracts

rfc/src/rfcs/0012-loop-contracts.md, after:

- **Feature Name:** Loop Contracts
- **Feature Request Issue:** [#3168](https://github.com/model-checking/kani/issues/3168)
- **RFC PR:** [#3167](https://github.com/model-checking/kani/pull/3167)
- **Status:** Under Review
- **Version:** 1
- **Proof-of-concept:** 

-------------------

## Summary

Loop contracts provide way to safely abstract loops of a program, typically
in order to accelerate the verification process, and remove the loop unwinding
bounds. The key idea is to over-approximate the possible set of program states,
while still being precise enough to be able to prove the desired property.

## User Impact

Loop contracts provide an interface for a verified, sound abstraction.
The goal for specifying loop contracts in the source code is two fold:

* Unbounded verification: Currently, proving correctness
  (i.e. assertions never fail) on programs with unbounded control flow (e.g. 
  loops with dynamic bounds) Kani requires unwinding loops for a large number of
  times, which is not always feasible. Loop contracts provide a way to abstract
  out loops, and hence remove the need for unwinding loops.
* Faster CI runs: In most cases, the provided contracts would also significantly
  improve Kani's verification time since all loops would be unrolled only to
  a single iteration.



Loop contracts are completely optional with no user impact if unused. This
RFC proposes the addition of new attributes, and functions, that shouldn't
interfere with existing functionalities.


## User Experience

A loop contract specifies the behavior of a loop as a boolean predicate
(loop invariants clauses) with certain frames conditions (loop modifies clauses)
that can be checked against the loop implementation, and used to abstract out
the loop in the verification process.

We illustrate the usage of loop contracts with an example.
Consider the following program:
```rs
fn simple_loop() {
    let mut x: u64 = kani::any_where(|i| *i >= 1);

    while x > 1{
        x = x - 1;
    };

    assert!(x == 1);
}
```
The loop in the `simple_loop` function keep subtracting 1 from `x` until `x` is 1.
However, Kani currently needs to unroll the loop for `u64::MAX` number of times
to verify the assertion at the end of the program. 

With loop contracts, the user can specify the behavior of the loop as follows:
```rs
fn simple_loop_with_loop_contracts() {
    let mut x: u64 = kani::any_where(|i| *i >= 1);

    #[kani::loop_invariant(x >= 1)]
    while x > 1{
        x = x - 1;
    };

    assert!(x == 1);
}
```
The loop invariant clause `#[kani::loop_invariant(x >= 1)]` specifies the loop
invariants that must hold at the beginning of each iteration of the loop right before
checking the loop guard.

In this case, Kani verifies that the loop invariant `x >= 1` is inductive, i.e.,
`x` is always greater than or equal to 1 at each iteration before checking `x > 1`.


Also, once Kani proved that the loop invariant is inductive, it can safely use the loop
invariants to abstract the loop out of the verification process.
The idea is, instead of exploring all possible branches of the loop, Kani only needs to
prove those branches reached from an arbitrary program state that satisfies the loop contracts,
after the execution of one iteration of the loop.

So, for loops without break statements, we can assume all post-states of the loop satisfying
`inv && !loop_guard` for proving post-loops properties.
The requirement of satisfying the negation of the loop guard comes from the fact that a path
exits loops without break statements must fail the loop guard.

For example, applying loop contracts in `simple_loop` function is equivalent to the following:
```rs
fn simple_loop_transformed() {
    let mut x: u64 = kani::any_where(|i| *i >= 1);

    x = kani::any(); // Arbitrary program state that
    kani::assume( !(x > 1) && x >= 1); // satisfies !`guard` && `inv` 

    assert!(x == 1);
}
```
The assumption above is actually equivalent to `x == 1`, hence the assertion at the end
of the program is proved.

### Write Sets and Havocking

For those memory locations that are not modified in the loop, loop invariants state
that they stay unchanged throughout the loop are inductive. In other words, Kani should
only havoc the memory locations that are modified in the loop. This is achieved by
specifying the `modifies` clause for the loop. For example, the following program:
```rs
fn simple_loop_two_vars() {
    let mut x: u64 = kani::any_where(|i| *i >= 1);
    let mut y: u64 = 1;

    #[kani::loop_invariant(x >= 1)]
    #[kani::loop_modifies(x)]
    while x > 1{
        x = x - 1;
    };

    assert!(x == 1);
    assert!(y == 1);
}
```
write to only `x` in the loop, hence the `modifies` clause contains only `x`.
Then when use the loop contracts to abstract the loop, Kani will only havoc the memory
location `x` and keep `y` unchanged. Note that if the `modifies` clause contains also
`y`, Kani will havoc both `x` and `y`, and hence violate the assertion `y == 1`.

Kani can employs CBMC's write set inference to infer the write set of the loop.
So users have to specify the `modifies` clauses by their self only when the inferred write
sets are not complete---there exists some target that could be written to in the loop but 
is not in the inferred write set.

### Proof of termination
    
Loop contracts also provide a way to prove the termination of the loop.
Without the proof of termination, Kani could report success of some assertions that
are actually unreachable due to non-terminating loops.
For example, consider the following program:

```rs
fn simple_loop_non_terminating() {
    let mut x: u64 = kani::any_where(|i| *i >= 1);

    #[kani::loop_invariant(x >= 1)]
    while true{
        x = x;
    };

    assert!(x >= 1);
}
```
After abstracting the loop, the loop will be transformed to no-op, and the assertion
`x >= 1` will be proved. However, the loop is actually an infinite loop, and the
assertion will never be reached.

For this reason, Kani will also require the user to provide a `decreases` clause that
specifies a decreasing expression to prove the termination of the loop. For example, in
```rs
fn simple_loop_terminating() {
    let mut x: u64 = kani::any_where(|i| *i >= 1);

    #[kani::loop_invariant(x >= 1)]
    #[kani::loop_decreases(x)]
    while x > 1{
        x = x - 1;
    };

    assert!(x >= 1);
}
```
, the `decreases` clause `#[kani::loop_decreases(x)]` specifies that the value of `x`
decreases at each iteration of the loop, and hence the loop will terminate.


## Detailed Design


Kani implements the functionality of loop contracts in three places.

1. Procedural macros `loop_invariant`, `loop_modifies`, and `loop_decreases`.
2. Code generation for builtin functions expanded from the above macros.
3. GOTO-level loop contracts using CBMC's contract language generated in
   `kani-compiler`.

### Procedural macros `loop_invariant`, `loop_modifies`, and `loop_decreases`.

We will implement the three proc-macros `loop_invariant`, `loop_modifies`, and `loop_decreases` to
embed the annotation logic as Rust code. Kani will then compile them into MIR-level code.


### Code Generation for Builtin Functions

Then in the MIR, we codegen the loop contracts as GOTO-level expressions and annotate them
into the corresponding loop latches---the jumps back to the loop head.

The artifact `goto-instrument` in CBMC will extract the loop contracts from the named-subs
of the loop latch, and then apply and prove the extracted loop contracts.


### GOTO-Level Havocing

The ordinary havocing in CBMC is not aware of the type constraints of Rust type.
Hence, we will use customized havocing functions for modifies targets. In detail,
Kani will generate code for the definition of corresponding `kani::any()` functions
for each modifies target. Then Kani will create a map from the modifies target to the
the name of its `kani::any()` function, and add the map to the loop latch too.

On the CBMC site, `goto-instrument` will extract the map and instrument the customized
havocing functions for the modifies targets.

## Rationale and alternatives



### Rust-Level Transformation vs CBMC 

Besides transforming the loops in GOTO level using `goto-instrument`,
we could also do the transformation in Rust level using procedural macros, or
in MIR level.

There are two reasons we prefer the GOTO-level transformation.
First, `goto-instrument` is a mature tool that can correctly instrument the frame
condition checking for the transformed loop, which will save us from reinventing
the error-prone wheel. Second, the loop contracts synthesis tool we developed and
are developing are all based on GOTO level. Hence, doing the transformation in
the GOTO level will make the integration of loop contracts with the synthesis tool
easier.

## Open questions

- How do we integrate loop contracts with the synthesis tool? When the user-provided
  loop contracts are not enough prove the harness, we expect the loop-contract synthesizer
  can fix the loop contracts.
- How do we translate back modify targets that inferred by CBMC to Rust level? 
- It is not clear how the CBMC loop modifies inference works for Rust code. We need to
  experiment more to decide what would be the best UX of using loop modifies.
- How do we handle havocing in unsafe code where it is fine to break the safety invariant
  of Rust? In that case, we may need havocing function that preserves validity invariant
  but not safety invariant.
- What is the proper mechanism for users to specify the loops that they want to opt-out from applying loop contracts, and (optionally) the unwind numbers for them. Such options should be per-harness.

## Future possibilities

- We can employ CBMC's decreases inference to infer the decreases clauses to reduce the
  user burden of specifying the decreases clauses.

<!-- For Developers -->

---
